Spectral Latent Alignment for Cross-Domain
Recommendation
Divyam Sareen*
IIIT-Bangalore
Bengaluru, India
Divyam.Sareen@iiitb.ac.inSubham Agarwala*
IIIT-Bangalore
Bengaluru, India
Subham.Agarwala@iiitb.ac.inDaksh Rajesh*
IIIT-Bangalore
Bengaluru, India
Daksh.Rajesh@iiitb.ac.in
Abstract—Cross-domain recommendation aims to improve
recommendations in one domain by using knowledge from
another related domain. However, many existing approaches
either require significant overlap between users or items, or rely
on complex deep learning models that are difficult to train and
interpret.
In this work, we propose Spectral Latent Alignment (SLA),
a simple and interpretable method for cross-domain recom-
mendation. Instead of directly forcing latent factors or feature
distributions to match across domains, our approach focuses on
aligning the structural patterns of user–item interaction graphs.
We first compute spectral embeddings of each domain using
the graph Laplacian, which captures the underlying interaction
structure. We then align these embeddings using a small set of
anchor correspondences through an orthogonal transformation.
This approach allows knowledge transfer across domains
while preserving their individual characteristics. The method
is computationally efficient, theoretically grounded, and works
effectively even when overlap between domains is minimal.
I. INTRODUCTION
Recommender systems are widely used in modern digital
platforms such as e-commerce, streaming services, and social
media. A common challenge in these systems isdata sparsity,
where the number of user–item interactions is insufficient to
learn accurate recommendation models. This issue becomes
especially severe in new domains or platforms where only
limited interaction data is available.
Cross-domain recommendation (CDR) aims to address this
problem by transferring knowledge from a well-established
domain (source) to another domain with limited data (target).
For example, information from a movie recommendation sys-
tem may help improve recommendations in a book or music
domain.
Traditional approaches for cross-domain recommendation
typically rely on shared users or shared items across domains.
While effective in some cases, these methods become less
useful when the overlap between domains is small. Recent
methods based on deep learning attempt to learn domain-
invariant representations through neural networks and adver-
sarial training. Although these approaches have shown promis-
ing results, they often require large datasets and complex
training procedures.
In this work, we explore a simpler perspective. Instead of
aligning raw features or forcing latent factors to be iden-
tical across domains, we focus on aligning theinteractionstructureof the domains. User–item interactions naturally
form graphs whose structural patterns can reveal meaningful
relationships between users and items.
Based on this observation, we proposeSpectral Latent
Alignment (SLA). Our method first computes spectral embed-
dings of the user–item interaction graph in each domain. These
embeddings capture the main structural properties of the inter-
action network. Using a small set of anchor correspondences
between domains, we then align the embedding spaces using
a simple orthogonal transformation. This alignment enables
effective knowledge transfer while remaining computationally
efficient and interpretable.
II. RELATEDWORK
Cross-domain recommendation has been widely studied
as a way to mitigate data sparsity and cold-start problems
in recommender systems. The central idea is to leverage
knowledge learned in a data-rich source domain to improve
recommendation performance in a target domain with limited
interactions [5].
A. Matrix Factorization Approaches
Early work on cross-domain recommendation relied heavily
on matrix factorization techniques. One of the most influen-
tial approaches isCollective Matrix Factorization (CMF),
which jointly factorizes rating matrices from multiple domains
while sharing latent representations for overlapping users or
items [2]. By enforcing shared latent factors, CMF allows
information to propagate across domains. Variants of this
approach have been explored in several studies that extend
matrix factorization with domain-specific constraints or shared
latent spaces [3], [6].
However, these methods rely strongly on the existence of
overlapping users or items across domains. When the overlap
is small or nonexistent, the shared latent factor assumption
becomes difficult to satisfy and transfer performance degrades
significantly.
B. Deep Learning Approaches
More recent work has explored deep learning models for
cross-domain recommendation. Neural architectures can learn
complex nonlinear mappings between latent representations of
* Equal contribution.
different domains. For example, neural cross-domain recom-
mendation models learn domain-specific embeddings and use
neural networks to map these representations across domains
[4]. Other approaches integrate autoencoders or multi-task
learning frameworks to jointly model multiple domains [10].
While deep neural models can capture complex relation-
ships between domains, they typically require large training
datasets and careful hyperparameter tuning. In addition, the
resulting models are often difficult to interpret.
C. Adversarial Domain Adaptation
Another line of research applies adversarial learning to
reduce domain discrepancy. Domain-Adversarial Neural Net-
works (DANN) train a feature extractor together with a do-
main classifier in an adversarial setting so that the learned
representations are discriminative for the task while being
indistinguishable across domains [1]. This idea has been
adopted in several cross-domain recommendation models to
learn domain-invariant user representations [7].
Although adversarial methods can reduce domain shift, they
often require complex optimization procedures and may suffer
from unstable training dynamics. Moreover, aligning feature
distributions does not necessarily preserve the structural re-
lationships between users and items that are essential for
recommendation tasks.
D. Graph-Based Recommendation Methods
Recently, graph-based approaches have gained significant
attention in recommender systems. Since user–item interac-
tions naturally form bipartite graphs, graph neural networks
and spectral methods have been used to capture higher-order
connectivity patterns in interaction networks [8], [9]. These
methods highlight the importance of structural information in
recommendation systems.
However, most existing graph-based methods focus on im-
proving recommendation performance within a single domain
rather than transferring knowledge across domains.
III. PROPOSEDMETHOD
We proposeSpectral Latent Alignment (SLA), a method
that transfers knowledge across domains by aligning the struc-
tural representations of user–item interaction graphs.
A. Graph Representation
Each domain is represented as a bipartite graph consisting of
users and items. Interactions between users and items form the
edges of this graph. From this graph we compute thegraph
Laplacian, which captures the connectivity structure of the
interaction network.
Using the Laplacian matrix, we compute the top-keigen-
vectors to obtain a low-dimensionalspectral embeddingfor
each node in the graph. These embeddings capture the main
structural patterns of the user–item interactions.B. Anchor Correspondences
To align two domains, we assume the availability of a small
set ofanchor correspondences. These anchors may represent
shared users, shared item categories, or other semantic links
between domains.
LetU SandU Tdenote the spectral embeddings of the source
and target domains respectively. For the anchor nodes, we
extract the corresponding embedding rowsU(a)
SandU(a)
T.
C. Embedding Alignment
We compute an orthogonal transformation matrixQthat
aligns the source embeddings with the target embeddings by
solving the following optimization problem:
ˆQ= arg min
QTQ=I∥U(a)
SQ−U(a)
T∥2
F
This is known as theOrthogonal Procrustes problemand
can be solved efficiently using singular value decomposition
(SVD).
The aligned source embeddings are then obtained as
˜US=USQ
After alignment, the source and target embeddings lie in a
shared latent space, enabling knowledge transfer between the
domains.
D. Recommendation Transfer
Once the embeddings are aligned, a recommendation model
trained on the source domain can be applied to the target
domain using the aligned representations. This allows infor-
mation from the source domain to improve recommendations
in the target domain.
The main advantages of the proposed approach are:
•It leverages the structural information of user–item inter-
action graphs.
•It requires only a small number of anchor correspon-
dences.
•It avoids complex adversarial training procedures.
•It is computationally efficient and interpretable.
E. Algorithm
Algorithm 1Spectral Latent Alignment - Training
Require:Source interaction matrixR S, target interaction ma-
trixR T, anchor index setA(sizem), spectral dimension
k
Ensure:Trained predictorM, orthogonal alignment bQ
1:Construct bipartite graphsG SandG TfromR SandR T
2:Compute normalized graph LaplaciansL SandL T
3:Compute top-keigenvectors ofL S; formU S∈RnS×k
4:Compute top-keigenvectors ofL T; formU T∈RnT×k
5:Extract anchor row-embeddings:
X←U(A)
S∈Rm×k, Y←U(A)
T∈Rm×k
6:Compute matrixM←X⊤Y
7:Take SVDM=U MΣMV⊤
M
8:Form orthogonal Procrustes estimator bQ←U MV⊤
M
9:Form aligned source embeddings eUS←U SbQ
10:Train predictorMusing eUS.
11:returnMand bQ=0
Algorithm 2Spectral Latent Alignment - Inference
Require:Target interaction matrixR T, source embedding
matrixU S, orthogonal alignment bQ(returned by Algo-
rithm 1), trained predictorM(returned by Algorithm 1),
spectral dimensionk, integerK(top-Krecommendations)
Ensure:Top-Kranked items for each query user
1:Construct bipartite graphG TfromR T
2:Compute normalized LaplacianL TofG T
3:Compute top-keigenvectors ofL T; formU T∈RnT×k
4:foreach query userudo
5:z S←row ofU Scorresponding to useru
6:z u←zSbQ{map source embedding into target frame}
7:C u←candidate set of target items
8:foreach itemi∈ C udo
9:v i←row ofU Tcorresponding to itemi
10:s u,i← M(z u, vi)
11:end for
12:SortC ubysu,iin descending order
13:Output top-Kitems for useru
14:end for=0
IV. THEORETICALANALYSIS
In this section we prove a quantitative excess-risk bound for
the SLA pipeline under the convention that source embeddings
are rotated into the target frame and a predictor is trained on
those aligned source embeddings. Concretely, we show that the
target risk of the trained model is bounded by the source risk
plus two interpretable contributions: (i) aProcrustes (anchor-
estimation) termthat scales as√
k·O 
∥X⊤E∥2/σmin(X⊤X)
and therefore decreases with the number and quality of
anchors, and (ii) aspectral-mismatch term√
k ε/γcon-
trolled by the Laplacian perturbationε=∥L T−L S∥2and the source spectral gapγ. An additional term∆ labels
appears when the conditional label-generating mechanisms
differ across domains. This decomposition both justifies SLA’s
two-step design (spectral embedding followed by orthogonal
alignment) and provides actionable diagnostics: the quantities
ε, γ, σ min(X⊤X),∥X⊤E∥2are empirically estimable, so the
bound predicts when alignment should help and suggests
remedies (e.g., collect more or better anchors, increase anchor
diversity, or fine-tune on a small target-labelled set) when
transfer is likely to fail.
A. Notation and convention
We adopt the following conventions throughout this proof:
•LS, LT∈Rn×nare the (normalized) Laplacians of the
source and target bipartite graphs.
•US, UT∈Rn×kdenote the top-korthonormal eigenvec-
tor matrices (rows arek-dimensional node embeddings).
•Anchors produceX=U(a)
S∈Rm×kandY=U(a)
T∈
Rm×k.
•bQ∈O(k)is the orthogonal Procrustes estimator defined
by
bQ= arg min
Q∈O(k)∥XQ−Y∥ F
We therefore interpret bQas mappingsourcecoordinates
into thetargetcoordinate frame (i.e.U SbQis the source
embedding expressed in the target frame).
•LetQ 0∈O(k)denote an orthogonal matrix achieving
the minimal alignment between the full eigenspaces:
Q0= arg min
Q∈O(k)∥USQ−U T∥F
•We denote by eUS=USbQthealigned sourceembedding
matrix (source→target).
•ftgtdenotes the predictor trained on eUS(sof tgtexpects
inputs in the target frame). We also writef srcfor the
predictor trained on rawU S. They are related by
ftgt(z) =f src(bQ⊤z)
•The squared loss isℓ(f(z), y) = (f(z)−y)2and the
domain risk isR D(f) =E (z,y)∼D [ℓ(f(z), y)].
B. Assumptions
A1 Spectral embeddings:U S, UTare the top-korthonor-
mal eigenvector matrices ofL SandL T.
A2 Laplacian perturbation:L T=LS+∆with∥∆∥ 2≤ε.
A3 Spectral gap: The source LaplacianL Shas a spectral
gapγ >0at indexk(so the top-keigenspace is
isolated).
A4 Anchors: There aremanchor correspondences. Let
X=U(a)
S∈Rm×k, Y=U(a)
T∈Rm×k
be the anchor row-embeddings (rows come from
matched nodes). AssumeXhas full column rank.
A5 Anchor model: The anchor residual matrixE∈Rm×k
is defined as:
E=Y−XQ 0=U(a)
T−U(a)
SQ0
A6 Predictor smoothness & bounded embeddings: The
predictorf tgtisLf-Lipschitz:
|ftgt(z)−f tgt(z′)| ≤L f∥z−z′∥2∀z, z′∈Rk
and all embeddings satisfy∥u d,i∥2≤Bfor some finite
B.
C. Supporting Lemmas
We first state two supporting lemmas that we use in the
main proof:
Davis-Kahan Theorem: UnderA1-A3the principal-angle
distance between the top-keigenspaces satisfies
∥sin Θ(U S, UT)∥2≤∥∆∥ 2
γ≤ε
γ
Consequently,
min
Q∈O(k)∥USQ−U T∥F=∥U SQ0−UT∥F≤√
kε
γ
Remark- This is the standard Davis–Kahan perturbation
bound for eigenspaces; the Frobenius inequality follows from
∥ · ∥F≤√
k∥ · ∥ 2for matrices withrank≤k.
Procrustes Perturbation: LetX∈Rm×khave full column
rank and letY∈Rm×kbe anchor rows of the target eigen
space. DefineQ 0and E as above so thatY=XQ 0−E. Let
bQbe the orthogonal Procrustes solution from(X, Y). If
∥X⊤E∥2<1
2σmin(X⊤X)
then
∥bQ−Q 0∥2≤2∥X⊤E∥2
σmin(X⊤X)
Sketch- SetM=X⊤Y=X⊤XQ 0+X⊤E=A+B. The
Procrustes solution equals the orthogonal (polar) factorU(M)
ofM, whileQ 0=U(A). Standard perturbation analysis of
the polar factor (together with Weyl’s inequalities for singular
values) yields
∥U(A+B)−U(A)∥2≤2∥B∥ 2
σmin(A)
when∥B∥ 2<1
2σmin(A). SubstituteA=X⊤XQ 0and
B=X⊤Eand use thatσ min(A) =σ min(X⊤X)(right-
multiplication by orthogonalQ 0preserves singular values).
This gives the claim.
D. Proof
Letz T,jdenote the true target embedding of nodej(thej-th
row ofU T) and letez S,jdenote the aligned-source embedding
for the same index (thej-th row of eUS=U SbQ).The proof
proceeds by (i) controlling the change in loss when replacing
true target embeddings by aligned-source embeddings, (ii)
isolating any label-distribution discrepancy, and (iii) bounding
the embedding mismatch via Procrustes and Davis–Kahan
estimates.Step 1 - Relate prediction risk change to embedding error:
Sincef tgtisL f-Lipschitz and embeddings are uniformly
bounded byB, for every indexjand labelywe have
ℓ(ftgt(zT,j), y)−ℓ(f tgt(ezS,j), y)≤LfB∥z T,j−ezS,j∥2
Averaging over the target distribution and converting the
average of row norms to a Frobenius norm via Cauchy–
Schwarz yields the bound
R(true)
T(ftgt)−R(aligned)
T (ftgt)≤LfB1√n∥eUS−UT∥F
(1)
where
R(true)
T(ftgt) =E (zT,y)∼T [ℓ(ftgt(zT), y)]
and
R(aligned)
T (ftgt) =E (y)∼T [ℓ(ftgt(ezS), y)]
Step 2 - Bound difference betweenR(true)
T(ftgt)and
RS(ftgt): The source risk offon aligned-source inputs is
defined by
RS(ftgt) =E (ezS,y)∼S [ℓ(ftgt(ezS), y)]
The difference between the target risk evaluated on aligned
inputs and the source risk decomposes into an explicit label-
shift term:
∆labels :=R(aligned)
T (ftgt)−R S(ftgt)
=1
nnX
j=1
Ey∼PT(·|j)[ℓ(ftgt(ezS,j), y)]
−Ey∼PS(·|j)[ℓ(ftgt(ezS,j), y)](2)
whereP T(· |j)andP S(· |j)are the conditional label
distributions at indexjin target and source respectively.
Combining (1) and (2) gives the exact decomposition
R(true)
T(ftgt)−R S(ftgt) = 
R(true)
T(ftgt)−R(aligned)
T (ftgt)
+∆labels
⇒R(true)
T(ftgt)−R S(ftgt)≤LfB1√n∥eUS−UT∥F+|∆ labels|
(3)
If the conditional label mechanism is the same in source and
target then∆ labels = 0and only the embedding term remains.
Step 3 - Decompose the embedding matrix error into
Procrustes error and subspace mismatch: Write eUS=USbQ
and add-and-subtractU SQ0to obtain
∥eUS−UT∥F≤ ∥U SbQ−U SQ0∥F+∥U SQ0−UT∥F
≤√
k∥bQ−Q 0∥2+∥U SQ0−UT∥F(4)
since∥U S∥F=√
k.
Step 4 - Davis-Kahan bound: By the Davis–Kahan inequality,
∥USQ0−UT∥F≤√
kε
γ(5)
Step 5 - Procrustes Perturbation: From the Procrustes/polar
perturbation analysis (valid under the mild small-perturbation
condition∥X⊤E∥2<1
2σmin(X⊤X)) we have
∥bQ−Q 0∥2≤2∥X⊤E∥2
σmin(X⊤X)(6)
Step 6 - Conclusion: Substituting (6) and (5) into (4) yields
∥eUS−UT∥F≤√
k·2∥X⊤E∥2
σmin(X⊤X)+√
kε
γ
Inserting this bound into (3) and absorbing1/√ninto the
constantL fBgives
R(true)
T(ftgt)−R S(ftgt)≤LfB√
k·2∥X⊤E∥2
σmin(X⊤X)+√
kε
γ
This completes the proof.
V. BASELINES ANDHYPERPARAMETERS
VI. OURRESULTS
VII. CONCLUSION
REFERENCES
[1] Yaroslav Ganin, Evgeniya Ustinova, Hana Ajakan, Pascal Germain,
Hugo Larochelle, Franc ¸ois Laviolette, Mario Marchand, and Victor
Lempitsky. Domain-Adversarial Training of Neural Networks. Journal
of Machine Learning Research, 2016.
[2] Ajit P. Singh and Geoffrey J. Gordon. Relational Learning via Collective
Matrix Factorization. Proceedings of the 14th ACM SIGKDD Interna-
tional Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD),
2008.
[3] Bin Li, Qiang Yang, and Xiangyang Xue. Can Movies and Books
Collaborate? Cross-Domain Collaborative Filtering for Sparsity Reduc-
tion. Proceedings of the 21st International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (IJCAI), 2009.
[4] Ali M. Elkahky, Yang Song, and Xiaodong He. A Multi-View Deep
Learning Approach for Cross Domain User Modeling in Recommenda-
tion Systems. Proceedings of the 24th International World Wide Web
Conference (WWW), 2015.
[5] Iv ´an Cantador, Ignacio Fern ´andez-Tob ´ıas, Shlomo Berkovsky, and Paolo
Cremonesi. Cross-Domain Recommender Systems. In Recommender
Systems Handbook, Springer, 2015.
[6] Rong Hu, Liqiang Nie, and Xindong Wu. Personalized Recommendation
via Cross-Domain Triadic Factorization. Proceedings of the 22nd
International World Wide Web Conference (WWW), 2013.
[7] Fang Liu, Ruiming Tang, Xiuqiang He, Fuzheng Zhang, Ming Zhang,
and Shaoping Ma. Cross-Domain Recommendation via Collaborative
Deep Learning. Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD), 2017.
[8] Rex Ying, Ruining He, Kaifeng Chen, Pong Eksombatchai, William L.
Hamilton, and Jure Leskovec. Graph Convolutional Neural Networks
for Web-Scale Recommender Systems. Proceedings of the 24th ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining (KDD), 2018.
[9] Xiangnan He, Kuan Deng, Xiang Wang, Yan Li, Yongdong Zhang, and
Meng Wang. LightGCN: Simplifying and Powering Graph Convolution
Network for Recommendation. Proceedings of the 43rd International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval (SIGIR), 2020.
[10] Zhen Li and others. Deep Cross-Domain Recommendation. ACM
Transactions on Information Systems, 2019.